# Vector Spaces

# 4.6 Rank

## The Row Space

* If $$A$$ is an $$m \times n$$ matrix, 
  each row of $$A$$ has $$n$$ entries
  and thus can be identified with a vector in $$\mathbb{R}^n$$.
* The set of all linear combinations of the row vectors is
  called the **row space** of $$A$$ and is denoted by **Row** $$A$$.
* Each row has $$n$$ entries, so **Row** $$A$$ is a subspace of $$\mathbb{R}^n$$.
* Since the rows of $$A$$ are identified with the columns of $$A^T$$,
  we could also write **Col** $$A^T$$ in place of *Row** $$A$$.

## Theorem 13:

If two matrices $$A$$ and $$B$$ are row equivalent, then their row spaces are the same. 
**If $$B$$ is in echelon form, the nonzero rows of B form a basis for the row space of A** 
as well as for that of $$B$$.

### Proof: 

* If $$B$$ is obtained from $$A$$ by row operations, 
  the rows of $$B$$ are linear combinations of the rows of $$A$$.
* It follows that any linear combination of the rows of $$B$$
  is automatically a linear combination of the rows of $$A$$.
* Thus the row space of $$B$$ is contained in the row space of $$A$$.
* Since row operations are reversible, 
  the same argument shows that 
  the row space of $$A$$ is a subset of the row space of $$B$$.
* So **the two row spaces are the same**.
* If $$B$$ is in echelon form, 
  its nonzero rows are linearly independent 
  because no nonzero row is a linear combination of the nonzero rows below it.
  (Apply Theorem 4 to the nonzero rows of $$B$$ in reverse order, with the first row last).
* Thus the nonzero rows of $$B$$ form a basis of the
  (common) row space of $$B$$ and $$A$$.

## Example 2: 

Find bases for the row space, the column space, and the null space of the matrix

$$
A=\begin{bmatrix}
-2 & -5 &  8 &  0 & -17 \\
 1 &  3 & -5 &  1 &   5 \\
 3 & 11 & -19&  7 &   1 \\
 1 &  7 & -13&  5 &  -3 
\end{bmatrix}
$$

### Solution: 

* To find bases for the row space and the column space, 
  row reduce $$A$$ to an echelon form:

$$
A \sim B = 
\begin{bmatrix}
 1 & 3 & -5 &  1 &  5  \\
 0 & 1 & -2 &  2 & -7 \\
 0 & 0 &  0 & -4 & 20 \\
 0 & 0 &  0 &  0 &  0 
\end{bmatrix}
$$

* By Theorem 13, the first three rows of $$B$$ form a basis for the row space of $$A$$ 
 (as well as for the row space of $$B$$).
* Thus Basis for Row $$A$$: $$\left\{ (1,3,-5,1,5), (0,1,-2,2,-7), (0,0,0,-4,20)\right\}$$.
* For the column space, observe from $$B$$ that the pivots are in columns 1, 2, and 4.
* Hence columns 1, 2, and 4 of $$A$$ (not $$B$$) form a basis for Col A:
$$
\text{Basis for Col }A:=\left\{ 
\begin{bmatrix} -2 \\ 1 \\ 3 \\1 \end{bmatrix},
\begin{bmatrix} -5 \\ 3 \\11 \\7 \end{bmatrix},
\begin{bmatrix}  0 \\ 1 \\ 7 \\5 \end{bmatrix},
\right\}
$$

* Notice that any echelon form of $$A$$ provides (in its nonzero rows) 
  a basis for Row $$A$$ and also identifies the pivot columns of $$A$$ for Col $$A$$.
* However, for **Nul** $$A$$, we need the **reduced echelon form**.
* Further row operations on $$B$$ yield

$$
A \sim B \sim C= 
\begin{bmatrix}
 1 & 0 &  1 &  0 &  1  \\
 0 & 1 & -2 &  0 &  3 \\
 0 & 0 &  0 &  1 & -5 \\
 0 & 0 &  0 &  0 &  0 
\end{bmatrix}
$$

* The equation $$A\textbf{x}=\textbf{0}$$ is equivalent to $$C\textbf{x}=\textbf{0}$$,
  that is,

$$
\begin{align}
x_1+x_3+x_5 & = 0 \\
x_2-2x_3+3x_5 &= 0 \\
x_4-5x_5 &=0
\end{align}
$$

* So $$x_1=-x_3-x_5, x_2=2x_3-3x_5, x_4=5x_5$$, with $$x_3$$ and $$x_5$$ free variables. 
* The calculations show that

$$
\text{Basis for Nul }A:\left\{ 
\begin{bmatrix} -1 \\ 2  \\ 1 \\ 0 \\ 0  \end{bmatrix},
\begin{bmatrix} -1 \\ -3 \\ 0 \\ 5 \\ 1  \end{bmatrix},
\right\}
$$

* Observe that, unlike the basis for Col $$A$$, 
  the bases for Row $$A$$ and Nul $$A$$ have no simple connection with the entries in $$A$$ itself.

## Definition : Rank

The rank of $$A$$ is the dimension of the column space of $$A$$.
Since Row $$A$$ is the same as Col $$A^T$$, 
the dimension of row space of $$A$$ is the rank of $$A^T$$.
The dimension of the null space is sometimes called **the nullity of** $$A$$.


## Theorem 14: Rank Theorem

The dimensions of the column space and the row space of an $$m \times n$$ matrix A are equal.
This common dimension, the rank of $$A$$, 
also equals the number of pivot positions in $$A$$ 
and satisfies the equation

$$
\text{rank }A + \text{dim Nul }A = n
$$

### Proof:

* By Theorem 6, rank $$A$$ is the number of pivot columns in $$A$$.
* Equivalently, rank $$A$$ is the number of pivot positions in an echelon form $$B$$ of $$A$$.
* Since $$B$$ has a nonzero row for each pivot, 
  and since these rows form a basis for the row space of $$A$$, 
  the rank of $$A$$ is also **the dimension of the row space**.
* The dimension of Nul $$A$$ equals the number of free variables in the equation $$A\textbf{x}=\textbf{0}$$.
* Expressed another way, 
  the dimension of Nul $$A$$ is the number of columns of $$A$$ that are not pivot columns.
  (It is the number of these columns, not the columns themselves, that is related to Nul $$A$$).
* Obviously,

$$
\left[ \text{# of pivot columns} \right] +
\left[ \text{# of nonpivot columns} \right] =
\left[ \text{# of columns} \right]
$$
* This proves the theorem.

## Example 3:

* a. If $$A$$ is a $$7 \times 9$$ matrix with a two-dimensional null space, what is the rank of $$A$$?
* b. Could a $$6 \times 9$$ matrix have a two-dimensional null space?

### Solution:

#### a.

* Since $$A$$ has 9 columns, (rank $$A$$)+2=9,
and hence rank $$A$$=7.

#### b. 

* No. 
* If a $$6 \times 9$$ matrix, call it $$B$$, has a two-dimensional null space, 
  it would have to have rank 7, by the Rank Theorem.
* But the columns of $$B$$ are vectors in $$\mathbb{R}^6$$,
  and so the dimension of Col $$B$$ cannot exceed 6; 
  that is, rank i$$B$$ cannot exceed 6.

## Theorem: The Invertible Matrix Theorem (continued)

Let $$A$$ be an $$n \times n$$ matrix. 
Then the following statements are each equivalent to the statement that 
$$A$$ is an invertible matrix.

* 13.The columns of $$A$$ form a basis of $$\mathbb{R}^n$$.
* 14.Col $$A$$ = $$\mathbb{R}^n$$.
* 15.Dim Col $$A$$ = $$n$$.
* 16.rank $$A$$=$$n$$
* 17.Nul $$A$$=$$\left\{ \textbf{0} \right\}$$
* 18.Dim Nul $$A$$ = 0

### Proof:

* Statement (13) is logically equivalent to statements (5) and (8) regarding linear independence and spanning.
* The other five statements are linked to the earlier ones of the theorem 
  by the following chain of almost trivial implications:
$$
(7) \rightarrow (14) \rightarrow (15) \rightarrow (16) \rightarrow (18) \rightarrow (17) \rightarrow (4)
$$

* Statement (7), which says that the equation $$A\textbf{x}=\textbf{b}$$
  has at least one solution for each $$b$$ in $$\mathbb{R}^n$$,
  implies (14), because Col $$A$$ is precisely the set of all $$b$$ such
  that the equation $$A\textbf{x}=\textbf{b}$$
  is consistent.
* The implications $$(14) \rightarrow (15) \rightarrow (16)$$ 
  follow from the definitions of dimension and rank.
* If the rank of $$A$$ is $$n$$, the number of columns of $$A$$,
  then dim Nul $$A$$=0, 
  by the Rank Theorem, and so
  Nul $$A$$=$$\left\{ \textbf{0} \right\}$$.
* Thus $$(16) \rightarrow (18) \rightarrow (17)$$.
* Also, (17) implies that the equation $$A\textbf{x}=\textbf{0}$$
  has only
  the trivial solution, which is statement (4).
* Since statements (4) and (7) are already known to be equivalent to the statement that $$A$$ is invertible,
  the proof is complete.
